
--- Page 1 ---
AI & SOCIETY (2026) 41:3001–3013
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-025-02686-z
RESEARCH
AI deskilling is a structural problem
Avigail Ferdman1
Received: 24 June 2025 / Accepted: 6 October 2025 / Published online: 5 November 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
Abstract
Many artificial intelligence tools replace or stand to replace human activity, via automated decision-making, recommender
systems and content generation. The more artificial intelligence (AI) replaces valuable human activity, the more it risks
deskilling humans of their human capacities. This paper argues for applying a structural perspective to this phenomenon. It
introduces the concept of ‘capacity-hostile environments’ to identify instances where AI mediation impedes human capacity
cultivation. The analysis moves beyond individual responsibility that agents have to cultivate their human capacities, demon-
strating how AI’s influence creates systemic conditions that could inhibit the development and exercise of human capacities
by undermining the process of capacity cultivation. Drawing on the philosophy of skill as well as social epistemology, this
paper argues that capacity cultivation (skilling) includes acquiring agential control over the capacities, inculcated through
a long, gradual process of habituation. Habituation, in turn, depends on learning from others: the ‘know how’ of the skill,
as well as a shared understanding of the value of the skill. AI mediation risks undermining the quality of the conditions for
capacity habituation, leading to capacity impoverishment. By exploring the role of AI in mediating human activity, the paper
highlights the need to evaluate AI applications based on their conduciveness or hostility to capacity cultivation. Ultimately,
it calls for a critical reflection on the values inherent in AI socio-technical systems and emphasizes the societal obligation
to foster capacity-conducive environments in the age of AI.
Keywords Skill · AI · Flourishing · Affordances · LLMs · Perfectionism
1 Introduction
researchers have found that AI dependence leads to the
erosion of activity awareness, competence maintenance,
In Plato’s Phaedrus, Socrates cautions that writing will and output assessment (Rinta-Kahila et al. 2023), while
deskill the capacity for memory in people’s minds: trust- in healthcare, AI dependence has been found to diminish
ing an external entity will discourage the use of their own diagnostic reasoning, declining clinical judgment, reduced
memory within them. A similar warning about technology- retention of tacit knowledge, declining ethical sensitivity and
induced deskilling has come into sharp relief recently with weakened moral judgment (NHS England 2023; Natali et al.
the rise of Large Language Models (LLMs). Philosophers, 2025; Budzyń et al. 2025).
educators, artists, and journalists are increasingly raising A key reason why deskilling is harmful is that it dimin-
concerns about the potential decline in our epistemic and ishes us as human beings, undermining our abilities in the
social capacities (Vallor 2015; Wong 2019; Fricker 2021; ‘arts of personhood’ (Vallor 2015): the epistemic, social,
Chiang 2023; Kudina and de Boer 2024; Rosen 2024; Tacca moral and creative capacities required to achieve compe-
and Gilbert 2024; Marin and Steinert 2025).1 There is grow- tency in our exercise of practical reason, our self-worth,
ing evidence of the erosion of critical thinking (Bonicalzi as well as mutual respect between persons, honesty and
et al. 2023; Gerlich 2025; Lee et al. 2025), decision-making justice, developed through relationships of dependency
and analytical reasoning (Zhai et al. 2024) as a result of over- (Hacker-Wright 2009). Yet given AI’s rapid integration into
reliance on artificial intelligence (AI). In the professions, our socio-technical environment, it’s unrealistic to expect
persons to be ‘virtuous superheroes’ (Mitcham 2024) and
* Avigail Ferdman 1 The worry isn’t consensual. Some think that LLMs might be ben-
avigailf@technion.ac.il eficial. https:// thewa lrus. ca/i- used- to- teach- stude nts- now-i- catch-
chatg pt- cheats; https:// daily nous. com/ 2025/ 03/ 07/a- philo sophe rs- refle
1 Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel ctions- on- teach ing- in-a- world- with- ai/.
Vol.:(0123456789)
--- Page 2 ---
3 002 AI & SOCIETY (2026) 41:3001–3013
will themselves to resist deskilling. In other words, framing on the moral implications of AI systems for capacity-skilling
deskilling as a matter of individual responsibility—expect- and human flourishing.
ing people to simply will themselves to cultivate ‘the arts
of personhood’—overlooks crucial structural aspects of the
2 Core human capacities: Developmental
problem. To a large extent, we develop and exercise our epis-
Perfectionism
temic, moral, social, and creative capacities in response to
our social and material environment (Ferdman 2019). A defi-
cient environment can lead to deskilling of our core human ‘Developmental Perfectionism’ is a neo-Aristotelian
capacities, and to the subsequent devaluation of their worth approach to human flourishing (Kauppinen 2025), where
as they continue to weaken. Rather than focusing only on flourishing is understood as a complex, unified, and well-
how human agents ought to engage with AI tools, we should rounded life (Hurka 1993). Humans exercise their capacities
also ask what kind of socio-technical environments would in activities that yield outcomes that have intrinsic value like
be best for the cultivation of our personhood. knowledge, beauty, morality, friendship (Kraut 2013; Brad-
Before addressing this challenge, I want to clarify how I ford 2016, 2021; Fletcher 2016). The competent exercise of
use the concept of skill. “Deskilling” is a useful analogy for the human capacities is the manifestation of the achievement
the deterioration in the arts of personhood. It’s important, of the intrinsically valuable goods, making the capacities
however, to distinguish between skill and capacity. Gener- intrinsically valuable too (Bradford 2016). For example,
ally, a skill is a kind of disposition to form knowledge appro- the value of being on the summit of Mt. Everest is gained
priate to a particular domain of human activity (Stanley from the competent exercise of a combination of capacities
and Williamson 2017), as well as having the know-how for involved in climbing it, and not from simply being there
executing the knowledge (Pavese 2022). Yet ‘skill’ is some- (say, if one arrives there by helicopter, Hurka 1993; Bradford
times used to denote expertise in domains, such as hunt- 2015). Developmental Perfectionism neatly captures why
ing/gathering, basket-weaving, writing, coding, navigating, deskilling is bad: capacity-deskilling is bad because our
and composing music. On this use, deskilling is not always human capacities are constitutive of our flourishing. Impov-
negative: skill obsolescence has always been part of human erished capacities (i.e., capacity-deskilling), therefore, lead
history, where technological developments free up time and to impoverished lives (Ferdman 2024).
resources for the cultivation of other skills (Coeckelbergh Perfectionist philosophers argue for a set of core human
2019; Aylsworth and Castro 2024). The deskilling of our capacities such that when humans competently develop and
core human capacities—to know, create, form meaningful exercise them, they lead a flourishing life2:
relationships, and use our willpower—is a different mat- The epistemic capacities include theoretical rationality:
ter. In this sense, capacities are more analogous to virtues thinking, considering reasons to believe, forming beliefs,
(Sherman 1991; Stichter 2020). The deskilling of our core contemplating (Bradford 2025); and practical rationality
human capacities is bad because inadequate development (Bradford 2015, 2021), manifesting in phronesis (common
of these capacities can lead to “capacity impoverishment”, sense or wisdom): doing the right thing in the right way for
which, in turn, diminishes us as humans and undermines the right reason.
our flourishing. Therefore, from a normative perspective, The social capacities include the moral capacity as well
whereas deskilling of activities like hunting, basket-weav- as the social and caring capacities for developing meaningful
ing or coding may be innocuous, capacity-deskilling should relationships of friendship and love (Hurka 1993).
always be a cause for worry. As such, we have reason to The capacity for creativity involves making unfamiliar
ensure that socio-technical environments we inhabit are con- combinations of familiar ideas, transforming a conceptual
ducive, rather than hostile, to the cultivation of our human space (Boden 2004), without relying merely on luck, acci-
capacities. dents, or mechanical procedures (Gaut, 2010).
I begin by introducing the core capacities to set the stage The capacity to will (volitional capacity): the ability to
for why their deskilling would be bad for humans (Sect. 2). exert effort, overcome difficulty, persevere and grow, in
Next, I draw on philosophy of skill to construct a framework order to achieve an intrinsically valuable goal (Bradford
for understanding the human capacities as skills (Sect. 3). 2015). Importantly, developing and exercising any of the
The structural lens is then added to the framework, to distin- human capacities is difficult, which therefore requires the
guish between environments that are conducive to capacity competent exercise of the capacity to will. I will therefore
cultivation and environments that are hostile to it (Sect. 4). treat the capacity to will as a meta-capacity of sorts.
In Sect. 5, I apply this framework to artificial personal assis-
tants (APAs)—one of the fastest growing uses of large lan-
guage models (LLMs). Section 6 concludes with reflections 2 The physical capacities are part of this set, but I do not discuss
them in this paper.
--- Page 3 ---
AI & SOCIETY (2026) 41:3001–3013 3003
3 What does it mean to be skilled? the environment, is less skilled compared to the agent who
A capacity‑skill framework initiated the activity, who has full agential control over it.
3.2 Habituation
The concept of skill is a useful analogy for the cultivation
and excellent exercise of the human capacities, as it explains
both what constitutes skill, as well as the process by which The process of becoming skilled is a gradual and slow pro-
persons become skilled.3 cess of habituation. Skill generally cannot be learnt through
Talents, knacks, or abilities are not purposeful or goal- testimony, and requires practice. As we move through stages
directed (e.g., breathing or digesting), rather they are things of skill development, from novice through to expert, we rely
that persons have. Skills, on the other hand, manifest in on concrete experience rather than abstract principles (Drey-
action, that is, in what agents do, and in the acquisition of fus and Dreyfus 1986). Habituation involves inculcation
mastery and control over an activity (e.g., playing basketball, through continued attunement to the demands of individual
the violin or chess, Shepherd 2021). Skills are also distinct cases; refinement of the action through successive trials and
form competences: competences are acquired, but leave no learning from mistakes (Ryle 2009, p. 234). This includes
room for any improvement, talent, or flair, and are not grada- encountering and overcoming disappointment and failure.5
ble: one can either do it or one cannot (Kremer 2020). Skills Through habituation, we gain experience, which requires
are also learnable, in contrast to instincts. Skilled agents’ considerable time and living (Sherman 1991).
capacity for novel behavior is precisely what distinguishes Habituation has two important components: intersubjec-
a skilled agent from a highly reliable automaton (Pavese tivity and embodiment. I take them in turn.
2023, p. 592).
3.2.1 Intersubjectivity
Rather than providing an exegesis of the rich literature
on the philosophy of skill, I pick out two properties of skill
I consider relevant: agential control and habituation,4 as Skill habituation has a ‘shared understanding’ dimension.
these properties will be important later for understanding First, becoming skilled typically requires a mentor to guide
the structural dimensions of capacity-deskilling. the novice into becoming an expert that engages in prac-
tice of the right kind. A good mentor is typically neces-
3.1 Agential control sary in order to cultivate the proper motivational structure
for becoming skilled (Sherman 1991). In the relationship
To be skilled in something is to have agential control over between mentor and novice, the mentor instills not only
it (Shepherd 2021), the ability to adjust the execution of the mechanical aspects of the skill, but, as importantly, the
the action as the performance unfolds. As agency develops, value of the skill, such that in the process of habituation, the
the balance between automaticity and control shifts through skilled agent eventually comes to view the value of the skill
a process of tuning and attuning (Sherman 1991, p. 175).. as their own. In the relationship, both mentor and mentee
Thus, to cultivate a skill is to develop flexible links between have shared intentions and they come to have “shared valu-
thought and action, such that continue to evolve even after ing” of the skill. This is an intersubjective mentor–mentee
expertise has been achieved (Vigani 2021). relationship.
Skills are therefore distinct from habits in an impor- The process of habituation is intersubjective also on
tant respect: skills require control over initiating the task, a societal scale. Social practices performed by groups or
whereas mere habits do not: they are elicited in response to whole societies can provide a mentoring environment:
environmental triggers (Pavese 2024). A habitual activity the family, colleagues, citizens and so on. Indeed, as Kate
is an activity that is triggered by something in the environ- Manne argues, social practices are often what generates
ment, where the agent performs the activity in response to moral reasons for action, as they have a constitutive aim or
the trigger. A skilled activity is one where the agent has full telos, which is ultimately the aim of helping people fare well
control over initiating the activity. The implication is that an
agent who performs out of habit, in response to triggers in
5 Dreyfus and Dreyfus (1986) characterize the process of becoming
skilled as a process comprised of 5-stages: novice, advanced begin-
ner, competent, proficient and expert. Rule-following is more domi-
3 For example, Nancy Sherman (1991) uses the metaphor to examine nant in the early stages, while gradually the agent exercises more
how persons develop moral virtue. sophistication and sensitivity to varying contexts, so that the later
4 Cf Schuster and Lazar (2024) who posit three constituents of skill: stages are characterized by rapid, fluid, involved engagement. On this
having success conditions; developed through practice guided by account, while becoming skilled in the capacities requires successive
those success conditions; shaped by the tools used in its exercise. My attempts at an activity, the process itself is one of growth rather than
account differs from theirs in that it puts much more emphasis on the simple repetition. This point will become relevant for my discussion
habituation process. automation and repetition later on.
--- Page 4 ---
3 004 AI & SOCIETY (2026) 41:3001–3013
rather than badly (Manne 2013, p. 69). Alasdair MacIntyre any embodied interaction (say if the only form of interaction
noted that learning is carried out through the practices of is mediated by online platforms), it would be much more
the common life: becoming the kind of agent who is respon- difficult to achieve, compared to interactions that involve a
sive to whatever it is that skillful action requires in order to significant level of embodiment.
achieve some common good, “has to be learned from teach- Putting the different characteristics of skill together, I pro-
ers and exemplars who know how to communicate this kind pose the following framework for conceptualizing capacity
of responsiveness to others through the habits of a com- cultivation as skilling:
mon life” (MacIntyre 2017 emphasis added). As such, social
Being capacity-skilled is having agential control over
practices play an important role in the formation of shared
the human capacities, obtained in a process of inter-
valuing regarding both the outputs (the product of the skilled
subjective, embodied habituation, manifested in com-
activity) and the skill itself.
petent exercise of the human capacities, as well as in
That skill has an intersubjective dimension is important
societal shared valuing of the capacities.
for the prospects of capacity development and exercise: to
cultivate a capacity requires learning from others, and a So far I have reflected on the constituents of capacity-as-
shared understanding that the capacity is in itself valuable. skill. To show how agents may become capacity-deskilled,
I now introduce the structural dimension.
3.2.2 Embodiment
4 Structural dimension of capacity
Successful habituation must include an embodied compo-
impoverishment
nent. According to the Enactive Approach in cognition,
embodied ‘participatory sense-making’ (De Jaegher and Di
Paolo 2007) is constitutive of social cognition (Di Paolo and On the capacity-skilling framework above, deskilling would
Thompson 2014), for example in paying moral attention to manifest in the impoverishment of the capacities: limited
the other, because the process of habituation of moral atten- agential control over the capacities, as well as a diminished
tion requires perceiving the other as an embodied being, who process of habituation and a devaluation of the capacities.
is similar to ourselves, through their voice and their gaze. Prima facie, capacity-deskilling may look like an individual
One comes to apprehend other perceived bodies as being vice: on a virtue ethics approach, I have a duty to myself
similar loci of embodied subjectivity, creating ‘embodied to cultivate my human capacities, and if I fail to do so, I
understanding’ (Gallagher and Zahavi 2013). The social am failing in the arts of personhood. However, framing the
interaction itself and its emergent dynamics constitute an problem of technology-induced capacity-deskilling as an
essential part of the cognitive process that is unfolding individual ethics problem does not capture the full picture
between the participants: “meaning is generated and trans- of deskilling. An important dimension of Aristotelian vir-
formed in the interplay between the unfolding interaction tues ethics is that a well-ordered polis is a necessary part
process and the individuals engaged in it” (De Jaegher and of human flourishing. Framing the response to the threats
Di Paolo 2007, p. 485). to our humanness as an individual responsibility problem
Crucially, without being embodied in a social interac- therefore misses the structural dimensions of the deskilling
tion—without the return of the gaze of the other—we would problem.
be hard-pressed to recognize them spontaneously as moral The structural dimension of capacity-deskilling can be
agents. The spontaneity of recognizing the other as moral captured by the concept of affordances. The environment
agent is inherent in the embodied interaction, whereas dis- one inhabits is a ‘world of affordances’ (Zimmermann et al.
embodied interaction requires the agent to exercise more 2025). Affordances are action possibilities formed by a
mental efforts in attributing moral agency to the other relationship between an agent and its environment offers to
(Marin 2024, p. 227). Similarly, for the good of friendship, persons (Gibson 1979; Nye and Silverman 2012, p. 179),
disembodied interactions make it harder to form meaningful that are not mere opportunities but invitations that can have
friendship because technologically mediated virtue friend- a severe influence on the behavior agents will exhibit in that
ships require more discipline for a diminished experience environment (Withagen et al. 2012). The concept of affor-
(Grasso 2025). dances helps explain how the environment is constitutive of
Therefore, being embodied is critical for becoming flourishing: the proper cultivation of the core capacities is
skilled insofar as the process of ‘shared valuing’ of the skill dependent on inhabiting an environment that affords action
requires some degree of doing something with the mentor(s), possibilities for activities, in turn triggering the capaci-
creating a shared history and a participatory sense-making ties associated with these activities. For example, a library
regarding both the product of the skill and the skill itself. affords the opportunity for reading books, thereby triggering
While shared valuing might be achieved in the absence of the epistemic and social capacities involved in reading.
--- Page 5 ---
AI & SOCIETY (2026) 41:3001–3013 3005
In the context of digital technologies, the integration that encourage the development and exercise of the human
of AI into healthcare, for example, affords the possibility capacities. Importantly, capacity-conducive environments
of offloading tasks to the machine, in turn likely leading will afford opportunities for cultivating the capacity to will,
to automation bias, where the user attributes authority or by encouraging agents to develop and exercise their other
excessive trust to an AI tool over advice from other sources. capacities (recall that developing the other capacities is dif-
This risks the loss of the user’s critical skills necessary for ficult and requires willpower). In this way, capacity-condu-
unexpected scenarios such as a system malfunction (Natali cive environments encourage the volitional capacity without
et al. 2025). Another example is the smartphone: it pro- expecting agents to be virtuous superheroes.
vides possibilities for interaction that are disconnected from An environment that provides inadequate conditions for
other persons, such as swiping, clicking and scrolling. This the development and exercise of the capacities constitutes
in turn invites determinate, separate, and repeatable tasks. a narrow field of affordances: it will not provide sufficient
This fractures the user’s affordance space into disconnected invitations for valuable activities. The absence of invitation
fields, ultimately leading to alienation, rather than offering for activities means that the capacities involved in these
opportunities for the development of new cognitive and bod- activities will not be triggered (Ferdman 2024).6 A narrow
ily skills that are mutually informing and enriching (Butler affordance field is normatively problematic, from a structural
2024). The problem depicted in these examples is that the point of view, when it leads to ‘affordance shrinkage’: when
affordance space is an impoverished environment: an envi- the reduction in action possibilities is systematic, enduring
ronment that provides a narrow field of affordances (more on and deeply entrenched (Dokumacı 2023; Krueger 2023),
that later), limiting the opportunities to engage in activities such that discourages users from finding ways to compen-
that require the competent exercise of our capacities. sate for the shrinkage.
As I stressed earlier, learning to value a capacity is part Disembodied environments might constitute a narrow
of the process of its habituation. When a person develops field of affordances for capacity cultivation. Recall the point
a capacity in a shallow way, they cannot learn to value the above about the inherent difficulty of cultivating the moral
more masterful levels of the capacity, since learning to value and social capacities in disembodied environments since
the capacity is a result of an ongoing, gradual process of it requires more effort and self-discipline for a diminished
habituation, which they haven’t gone through. The danger achievement. On an individual responsibility approach, over-
is that when a person does not value the state of being com- coming the difficulties of cultivating capacities in disembod-
petently skilled in the human capacities, they will not be ied environments would require of individuals to become
inclined to become properly skilled, thereby entrenching a virtuous superheroes and will themselves into overcoming
shallow level of the capacities. On a societal scale, when the difficulties. The structural dimension of skilling, on
enough persons do not value excellence or mastery of a the other hand, highlights that a disembodied environment
human capacity (e.g., critical thinking), the capacity is in does not provide the right kind of affordances that encour-
danger of atrophying. This then provides another justifica- age agents to develop and exercise the social capacities
tion for the structural approach: we cannot expect agents to necessary for morality and friendship. Take social media
be what Mitcham (2024) calls ‘virtuous superheroes’ and platforms, for example. Even without malicious intent on
properly cultivate their human capacities if their social envi- the part of designers of these disembodied environments,
ronment does not value the full maturation of these capaci- agents still might find themselves as users in a position
ties. First, the agent would not have the proper mentoring where they are being herded to behave in certain ways,
of the ‘know-how’, and second, they would not obtain the because these technologies are designed in specific ways
shared understanding regarding the value of the capacities. to keep users engaged with them. This is not because the
users are ignorant in a sense in which they are blameworthy,
4.1 Capacity‑hostile environments
but rather that users’ ignorance, maintained through things
like targeted adverts, filtered newsfeeds, and information
To distinguish between the types of environments according
to how favorable they are to capacity cultivation, I propose
to distinguish between capacity-hostile environments and 6 Richard Kraut mentions that the human capacities rarely operate
capacity-conducive environments. Capacity-hostile environ- in isolation from each other (Kraut 2007, p. 166). For example, the
capacity to know involves theoretical rationality as well as practical
ments restrict, limit or create a narrow field of affordances
rationality (Hurka 1993), the capacity to will ourselves to acquire
for capacity development and exercise. These environments knowledge (Bradford 2015), and the physical capacities, insofar
will afford opportunities for shallow skilling in the capaci- as knowledge is embodied. Without developing this point in depth,
to the extent that we accept Kraut’s characterization, it follows that
ties, and restrict opportunities for a fuller, well-rounded
capacity-hostile environments are typically hostile to the capacities
development and exercise of capacities. Capacity-condu-
in that they undermine the opportunity to engage in activities that
cive environments, on the other hand, are environments involve the exercise a combination of the capacities at a time.
--- Page 6 ---
3 006 AI & SOCIETY (2026) 41:3001–3013
bubbles, is utterly predictable, and, indeed, often a feature of their willpower, for example by replacing human activity
their engagement with social media platforms. As such, the with automated activity, or by offloading human activity,
context in which a user’s behavior occurs can better explain such as moral reasoning, to a non-human agent such as an
the behavior than appealing to the user’s dispositions (Tol- Artificial Moral Advisor (AMA). Automation is thus likely
lon 2024). to entrench a narrow field of affordances when it actively
This is precisely what the structural dimension captures: discourages the user from seeking avenues to compensate
a technology’s affordances make certain action possibili- for the deskilling. Insofar as the automation replaces human
ties more likely than others, given how the environment is activity without encouraging users to seek alternative ave-
designed. To the extent that embodied interaction is crucial nues to exercise their capacities, including the capacity to
for properly developing and exercising the capacities, the will, we may categorize these automation environments as
environment should not only afford but encourage embod- capacity-hostile.
ied interaction. The emphasis on encouraging rather than Of course, not all automation constitutes a capacity-hos-
affording embodied interaction is, as I argue elsewhere, that tile environment. Some automation may free agents from
merely having the opportunity to φ does not guarantee that drudgery and repetition (e.g., the washing machine). How-
the agent will actually φ and engage the capacities involved ever, we should note the cumulative effect of automation:
in φ-ing (Ferdman 2024). To ensure the activation of the automation and replacement of human activity is becoming
capacities, the environment has to encourage the activity more prevalent, across many human spheres. As such, auto-
of φ-ing, otherwise the capacities might not be triggered. mating multiple everyday human activities, across multiple
This is why the environment conducive to the capacities spheres (e.g., writing, searching, planning, organizing, navi-
has to include public goods like community centers, quality gation, decision-making, entertainment, personal wellbeing),
public spaces, public libraries, etc. that encourage structured might constitute a narrow field of affordances for capacity
and unstructured embodied interactions (Sypnowich 2016). development, where persons are discouraged from finding
Embodied engagement in these settings would be more con- ways to compensate for the shrinkage, precisely because so
ducive to creating shared experiences, which are necessary many activities are replaced with non-human activities. The
for shared valuing of the social capacities. structural approach provides us with a framework to evaluate
I propose that AI tools and systems can be analyzed as whether AI automation affords sufficient action possibilities
components in capacity-conducive or capacity-hostile envi- to develop and exercise the capacities, or whether it narrows
ronments along the following axes: the field of affordances; the field of affordances.
the level of embodied user engagement and the level of
intersubjectivity. 4.1.2 Embodied, intersubjective habituation
4.1.1 AI automation and the field of affordances An environment conducive to the development and exercise
of the capacities will afford opportunities for embodied,
As Bainbridge noted in “Ironies of Automation” (1983), in intersubjective habituation of the capacities. A capacity-
order to be skilled in a domain, one has to have efficient hostile environment, on the other hand, will restrict embod-
retrieval of knowledge from long-term memory, which ied interaction or afford action possibilities that encourage
depends on frequency of use. This type of knowledge devel- persons to primarily interact through disembodied mediums
ops only through use and feedback about its effectiveness. (e.g., digitally mediated interaction). A capacity-hostile
Automating routine tasks and leaving only exception-han- environment will also afford less opportunities to develop
dling to the human user, “deprives the user of the routine and exercise the capacities in concert with other humans. In
opportunities to practice their judgment and strengthen this environment, users will be interacting with non-human
their cognitive musculature, leaving them atrophied and agents, limiting the opportunity to develop an intersubjec-
unprepared when the exceptions do arise” (Lee et al. 2025). tive valuing of the capacities. Since embodied, intersubjec-
In other words, indiscriminately automating human activ- tive habituation of the capacities is a necessary component
ity may create capacity-hostile environments, insofar as of successfully developing and exercising the capacities, an
users will be deprived of the habituation process necessary environment with little opportunity for embodied interac-
for properly developing the capacities involved in routine tion may ultimately be hostile to capacity cultivation. AI
activities. could contribute to capacity-hostile environments, or it could
Additionally, recall that to develop and exercise the provide opportunities for capacity cultivation, depending on
capacities requires that the person exercise their capacity the field of affordances it creates. To demonstrate this sort
to will, since cultivating the capacities requires effort and of analysis, I next examine a fast-growing use case of AI:
determination. In capacity-hostile environments, the technol- Artificial Personal Assistants.
ogy or tool will afford users the opportunity of not exercising
--- Page 7 ---
AI & SOCIETY (2026) 41:3001–3013 3007
5 A rtificial personal assistants and capacity 5.1 Life‑planning
cultivation
To determine whether APAs might contribute to capacity-
Large language models (LLMs), such as ChatGPT, Claude. hostile or capacity-conducive environments, we first need to
ai, Gemini, etc., are increasingly being used as artificial per- unpack the meaning of ‘life-planning’. On an instrumentalist
sonal assistants (APAs). A recent report on types of uses view, ‘life-planning’ is a tool to help a person achieve their
of LLMs has found that the second and third highest uses goals and aims. A different approach, however, holds that
of LLMs were for life-planning: ‘organizing my life’ and life-planning is a self-constituting activity. Heyd and Miller
‘finding purpose’ respectively: it found that users utilize the (2010), for example, argue that the identity of the person
models to help them be more aware of their intentions (e.g., is, at least partly, constituted by their life plans, and hence
daily habits, New Year’s resolutions, introspective insights) that their overall long-term flourishing cannot be even ide-
and find small, easy ways of getting started with them. Addi- ally considered as relating to an independently identifiable
tionally, users reported that they rely on APAs to determine agent who tries to maximize their own good. Additionally,
and define their values, get past roadblocks, and take steps the activity of life-planning relates to the kind of person one
to self-develop: seeking advice on what they should do next, decides they want to be, rather than to the aims or goals one
reframing a problem and helping them to stay focused (Zao- wants to maximize. As such, planning one’s life is about
Sanders 2025). Another study shows that heavy users utilize developing a particular character or dispositions, rather than
LLMs for social validation, self-regulation, and interper- following an overall program of predetermined activities (p.
sonal guidance (Kim et al. 2025a). Sam Altman, CEO of 27). On this non-instrumentalist view, life-planning should
OpenAI, envisions a future where “eventually we can each not be outsourced to a tool.
have a personal AI team, full of virtual experts in different On a different vein, in theorizing about agency, Michael
areas, working together to create almost anything we can Bratman argues we are essentially planning creatures, and
imagine” (Altman 2024). that planning is a manifestation of practical rationality
APAs are attractive because they adapt to the individ- (Bratman 1983). Agency includes future-directed inten-
ual user’s needs, tailor their advice based on the user’s tions, which play two important agential roles in a person’s
responses, habits and preferences, and are willing to listen to deliberation: intentions have a settling function and a coor-
the user without judgment (Ma et al. 2023). APAs are con- dination function. The settling function manages the finite
stantly available, constituting “an always-on sounding board cognitive resources that humans have when facing a choice
with whatever subject-matter expertise you need, configured between options. The coordination function forms and
with your preferred tone of interaction—anything from strict organizes different types of plans, policies, and more specific
taskmaster to encouraging cheerleader” (Samuel 2025). future-directed intentions, imposing coherence constraints
While proponents of using LLMs as personal assistant on one’s intentions in order to allow for the incompleteness
might argue that these tools provide benefit to the users, of information and enable flexibility. What is more, plans
there is emerging evidence that becoming overly reliant on facilitate coordination both of a person’s activities over time,
such tools might be problematic in terms of capacity-skill- and of the person’s activities with other persons, enabling
ing. One of the features of LLMs is that they are ‘trained to us to achieve complex personal and social goals we would
do everything for everyone at every environment’ (Gebru not otherwise be able to achieve (p. 272). Finally, planning
and Torres 2023). This ostensibly gives LLMs the ability involves responding to unexpected events and surprises, that
to do everything for the user, from menial tasks to plan- could be sources of value and a sense of growth in one’s life
ning one’s life. If users become too dependent on LLMs (Heyd and Miller 2010, p. 32).
for things like organizing their life and finding meaning, From the perspective of capacity-as-skill, planning and
the APA might contribute to a capacity-hostile environ- organizing one’s life requires a combination of human
ment. There is already tentative evidence that young people capacities. First, following Bratman, it involves the epis-
growing up with the smartphone struggle with “everyday temic capacities. This manifests in two ways: in exercising
but essential” skills like empathy, time management, speak- theoretical rationality manifested in self-deliberation on
ing to other people, problem-solving and critical thinking one’s values and goals, and in exercising practical wisdom
(Halliday 2025). LLMs could potentially exacerbate this regarding coordinating one’s goals and intentions with one’s
deskilling, as follows. actions. Practical wisdom is especially relevant for plan-
ning one’s life. A wise person knows the effective means
to one’s ends and possesses an accurate understanding of
their situation and circumstances, especially in assessing
the testimony of others; they also possess discernment:
correct understanding of how the good and the bad apply
--- Page 8 ---
3 008 AI & SOCIETY (2026) 41:3001–3013
in particular circumstances. To be well motivated is not coordination (Floridi 2025) to merge synergistically discrete
enough, to have practical wisdom is to be an effective and uses of the APA in ways that greatly magnify their scope
savvy agent in the real world, equipped with valuable life and power to alter lives (Vallor 2016, p. 27). The more the
experience (Hursthouse 2022). Moreover, practical wisdom APA does things for the user, the more it could constitute a
is necessary for critically reflecting on one’s conceptions capacity-hostile environment, as follows.
of a flourishing life, in order to set appropriate goals and Let us first examine APAs as a field of affordances. Recall
strive to accomplish them in the right way (Stichter 2021). that a narrow field of affordances not only restricts the num-
In short, life-planning requires the cultivation and exercise ber of action possibilities, but also discourages the user from
of the epistemic capacities. seeking alternative avenues to compensate for the shrinkage
Life-planning also involves the social capacities. First, in capacity exercise. APAs are constantly available, designed
planning involves coordinating with others, toward achiev- to be helpful, always prompting the user to see if they could
ing complex goals. Second, recall that on the intersubjec- be of further assistance. As such, they might discourage the
tive approach, our reasons for action are (at least in part) user from seeking out new opportunities for growth and
drawn from our social relationships. As such, planning one’s exploration (Gabriel et al. 2024). When the APA replaces
life involves the moral and social capacities, insofar as our most of the user’s planning activities, it reduces the user’s
life goals (e.g., being a good parent, help combat climate need to engage in routine, small-scale decision-making
change) are similarly drawn from our social relationships. about organizing daily activities, or small-scale decisions
Planning one’s life also involves the capacity for creativ- that over time amount to broader life goals. As mentioned
ity, insofar as planning is always incomplete, and executing above, automation of routine tasks might be problematic
the plan requires the ability to reconsider and respond to since it deprives the user of the opportunity to “practice
novel situations, surprises and unexpected events. Finally, their judgment and strengthen their cognitive musculature”
life-planning requires the capacity to will, that is, to develop for activating in exceptional circumstances (Lee et al. 2025).
and exercise the aforementioned capacities, as well as to Overreliance on APAs could lead to a reduced sense of per-
resist the temptation to outsource the activity of planning to sonal competence (Gabriel et al. 2024), which could be
an external entity or tool. explained by the offloading of small-scale decisions to the
model, such as “help me plan my day” and “how should I
5.2 APAs as capacity‑hostile environments fill an unscheduled hour between meetings”,7 undermining
the habituation of the capacities necessary for trusting one’s
From the perspective of capacities as skills, APAs might decisions on life-planning.
entrench a capacity-hostile environment, if persons become Additionally, over-reliance on APAs, may, over time,
overly dependent on it for planning and organizing their acclimate the user to merely responding to triggers in the
lives. I readily acknowledge that using APAs to figure out environment (i.e., the APAs outputs) rather than exercising
one’s daily schedule or using the APA as a sounding board agential control over the planning. One of the affordances
for life goals does not in itself constitute a capacity-hostile that APAs provide is the invitation to become a plan-fol-
environment. If a person offloads planning activities to the lower rather than a plan-former. Take Sunsama, a scheduling
APA in a way that enables them to develop and exercise their app: “Each morning, Sunsama displays tasks synced from a
capacities in other activities, then APAs would not constitute variety of software, alongside your calendar and unfinished
a capacity-hostile environment. tasks from yesterday. It prompts you to prioritize today’s
However, an APA affords much more than using it as a work and to link tasks to your objectives—your largest goals
sophisticated calendar or occasional recommender system. for the week. Sunsama then schedules tasks logically into
APAs are a use-case of LLMs that can be integrated with your next available time slot, intelligently rescheduling them
other AI tools because LLMs are ultimately ‘trained to do when other tasks run into overtime. The app reminds you
everything for everyone at every environment’ (Gebru and throughout the day when it’s time to go to a meeting or when
Torres 2023). This makes then not only social companion, you should take a quick break. And when you’re done for the
moral advisor, life coach and personal butler, but all of them
combined in one. As such, APAs afford the replacement of
many of the activities involved in both planning and exe-
cuting one’s plans, that would otherwise require the proper 7 This might strike the reader as a caricature, but anecdotal evidence
cultivation and competent exercise of our epistemic, social, shows that LLMs are being used in this way (for example, bloggers
moral and creative capacities. It is the scale and extent of reporting on their ‘quest for ultimate productivity’ https:// forem. julia
lang. org/ svilu pp/ the- quest- for- ultim ate- produ ctivi ty- build ing- an-
the APA as all-encompassing agent that is the cause for
llm- power ed- assis tant- 21nk and https:// python. plain engli sh. io/ how-
worry: the leveraging of AI capabilities, such as dynamic
i- built-a- perso nal- ai- agent- to- autom ate- my- every day- tasks- 367c5
reasoning, real-time adaptability, and multi-scale operational 12a75 58.
--- Page 9 ---
AI & SOCIETY (2026) 41:3001–3013 3009
day, it prompts you to write a journal entry about what you in the real world, equipped with valuable life experience,
accomplished” (Guay 2025). whereas merely being well motivated is not sufficient for
One of the features of being skilled (Sect. 3) is having practical wisdom (Hursthouse 2022). Constantly turning to
agential control over initiating a task, whereas fulfilling APAs for advice, even if the advice is good, and the user is
the task in response to a trigger from the environment is well motivated to form valuable goals in their life, restricts
more like a habit than a skill (Pavese 2024). Now let us the user’s real-world experience and undermines the oppor-
consider the distinction between forming plans that involves tunity to develop practical wisdom.
self-deliberation, and following plans constructed by APAs. Furthermore, APAs are always there for the user, inviting
Forming a plan by self-deliberation requires exercising con- the user to constantly return to the APA for answers. Long-
trol over all the steps of the activity of forming the plan, term reliance on the APAs as a life coach/personal assistant
including over initiating the two functions of planning: set- would be problematic from a developmental-perfectionist
tling (deciding between options) and coordinating. As such, standpoint, as its convenience and constant availability may
forming a plan and executing it by settling and coordinating, limit agents’ ability to transition to develop the capacities
requires exercising the epistemic, moral, social and creative on their own. Unlike a good human moral exemplar, the
capacities involved in planning and executing the plan, as APA, by its purpose of giving advice, would not know to
well as the capacity to will oneself into initiating the activity remove itself as the training wheels and resist being called
of forming a plan to begin with. upon to provide a model for every decision, large or small
Relying on an APA to form our plans for us is more (Liu et al. (2022). In this way, the APA is narrowing the
like a habit that is developed in response to a trigger in the field of affordances for gaining experience in becoming an
environment. To illustrate, a user might begin with asking independent planner.
the APA to help them form a plan for finding a soulmate, APAs could also contribute to capacity-hostile environ-
find a career, resolve a conflict with a friend, or structure ments by discouraging intersubjective habituation of the
their daily schedule. The APA will propose a plan and help capacities. As APAs become more integrated into everyday
the user refine it, according to their personal preferences systems, and replace more and more human activity, they
or past behavior, and the user will then follow the plan. In afford an environment where the user increasingly interacts
this sequence of events, the user is not initiating the two with non-human entities for the planning and execution
functions of planning: settling and coordinating, but merely of their daily activities. AI mediation might come at the
responding to the APAs recommendations. Moreover, in expense of human interaction, decreasing the opportunity
plan-forming, the capacity to will is involved in initiating to develop our capacities in concert with other humans, and
the plan, whereas in plan-following, it is absent, because the create the shared valuing that is intrinsic to being capac-
user is responding to a trigger in the environment—the APA ity-skilled. While the development and exercise of human
output. When much of the planning process is offloaded to capacities depend on embodied, intersubjective interactions
the APA, it arguably requires a shallower exercise of the with others, APAs decrease embodied, intersubjective inter-
capacities that are ordinarily involved in making coherent action involved in life-planning activities.
plans and executing them. Moreover, making plans involves In embodied interaction, all the constant “living together”
taking responsibility if the plan fails, affording an oppor- which goes on in between and around physical, embodied
tunity to be self-critical and to improve accordingly. Yet if activities with other persons (Grasso 2025) better allow us
an APA makes a plan that ends up failing, the user could to test and grow our human capacities, compared to virtual
more readily shift the responsibility to the APA, forgoing environments. Preferring the advice of an APA over that
the opportunity for self-growth. of a friend or colleague may contribute to undermining the
On a similar vein, Schuster and Lazar (2024) argue that shared experience between persons. Ideally, when I seek the
responding to some content because it has popped up in my advice of a friend, we are creating a space of shared experi-
feed is in itself morally problematic, as it is not as good as ences, where the friend provides good advice because they
attending to something for my own moral reasons. Likewise, care. Further, our relationship is deepened because we share
following a plan because it was suggested by an automated the experience of knowing one another and coming to trust
tool, even if it is a good plan and fully coheres with my one another by seeking and giving advice. Thus the shared
values and preferences, is not as good, in developmental- experience, exercised via the social capacities, contributes
perfectionist terms, as forming my own plan (see also Zelny to the intrinsic good of friendship. In the context of APAs,
2025 on this point). Plan-forming requires a more in-depth however, even if after prolonged use the APA gets to “know”
utilization of my capacities, including my capacity to will the user and will respond with outputs that sound caring, it
myself into making a plan, following it and knowing when nevertheless cannot have shared experiences that are nec-
to revise it. Recall that having practical wisdom, as part of essary for mutual care, thus undermining the opportunity
the epistemic capacities, is to be an effective and savvy agent
--- Page 10 ---
3 010 AI & SOCIETY (2026) 41:3001–3013
to exercise the social capacities, as well as the epistemic or analysis; to examine, research, inspect. These activities
capacities involved in learning from others. require action, in contrast to merely receiving and accepting
In sum, APAs might constitute a capacity-hostile environ- or rejecting a recommendation. Therefore, to put oneself in
ment insofar as they afford users the possibility of offloading an investigative position is to take an agential, rather than
life-planning to the LLM in ways that discourage the user passive, role.
from finding ways to compensate for the loss of capacities Second, serendipity-incorporated recommender systems
ordinarily involved in planning. might encourage the volitional capacity by encouraging
cognitive patience. Cognitive patience is a willingness to
5.3 APAs in capacity‑conducive environments
linger in difficulty. We risk losing cognitive patience when
we replace difficult tasks with simpler ones. For example,
APAs could be an interim step on the path to capacity cul- replacing deep reading with skim reading on screens under-
tivation, so long as they provide opportunities to develop mines cognitive patience by undercutting the conditions
and exercise human capacities in embodied, intersubjective under which deep thought becomes possible (Hendrick
interactions with others, within an adequate field of affor- 2025). Similarly, vending machine recommender systems
dances. For example, APAs could incorporate serendipity suppress unfamiliar, surprising or even uncomfortable rec-
and agential control such that encourage the development ommendations, undermining cognitive patience. With ser-
and exercise of the capacities, as follows: endipitous recommendations, however, the user’s capacity to
will would be exercised: when we are open to put ourselves
5.3.1 Serendipity in a position of investigative ignorance, we are exercising
our will to linger in difficulty by accepting to consider some-
One feature of APAs is that they can be used as a sophisti- thing unpredictable, unexpected, surprising or uncomfort-
cated recommender system: the APA recommends a course able. In this way, we are also cultivating the tolerance for the
of action in response to the user’s prompts, preferences and conditions under which complexity—unpredictable, unex-
past behavior. Existing recommender systems are like vend- pected, surprising or uncomfortable recommendations—
ing machines: they prioritize efficiency and predictability of becomes possible.
the outputs, pigeonholing users to contents they are already Finally, recall that successful skilling requires exercising
familiar with. In contrast, recommender systems could be the skill in routine, small-scale tasks, in order to competently
designed more like a tool box, rather than vending machine. exercise judgment when larger decisions are necessary. Ser-
A tool box recommender system could support exploration endipity-incorporated recommender systems that includes
and unexpected discoveries, by deliberately introducing ele- surprising results might provide the appropriate environment
ments of surprise and challenge into the user experience for dealing with small-scale unexpected events, in prepara-
through productive friction. One of the main differences tion for the event of having to make life-changing decisions,
between the vending machine and tool box models is that as well being able to plan one’s life without depending on
the latter explicitly designs for serendipity: the art of discov- the APA.
ering new, advantageous things through chance encounters
with unexpected information (Danzico 2010; Reviglio 2019; 5.3.2 Cultivating agential control
Campbell 2023; Kim et al. 2025b). As such, serendipitous
recommender systems are designed for novelty and unex- As I have argued throughout, APAs used in excess are prob-
pectedness (Kotkov 2024), emphasizing exploration over lematic from the point of view of Developmental Perfec-
efficiency and predictability (Chen 2022). tionism, as they could narrow the field of affordances for
Because serendipity encourages exploration, serendipity- capacity cultivation. One way to avoid excess is to ensure
incorporated APAs could contribute to capacity-conducive that the APAs are interim tools, that help the user become
environments. First, let us consider the user’s state of mind: an independent planner. For example, the ‘always on, always
to take advantage of the serendipitous event, the agent needs there for you’ feature could be replaced with a design that
to actively put themself in a position of “investigative igno- explicitly and transparently guides the user to disengage
rance”—recognizing and exploiting the state of ignorance to from the tool, instead encouraging them to engage in embod-
come up with new and more satisfying information (Arfini ied, intersubjective interactions. In other words, designing
et al. 2020). Putting oneself in a position of investigative APAs to help persons cultivate agential control over plan-
ignorance involves exercising the capacity to will—to be ning their life, including the ability and motivation to initiate
willing to step outside of one’s comfort zone by consider- the activity of planning itself. Learning to become independ-
ing unexpected recommendations. Additionally, to inves- ent from the APA would enable the user to develop and exer-
tigate, according to the Oxford English Dictionary, is to cise their epistemic, creative and social capacities, as well
seek to understand something through examination, study, as their capacity to will, manifest in initiating the activity of
--- Page 11 ---
AI & SOCIETY (2026) 41:3001–3013 3011
planning and exercising cognitive patience in responding to intersubjective, embodied interactions to compensate for
unexpected, unforeseen and uncomfortable events. AI-mediated, disembodied environments.
Interestingly, LLMs users are free to ask the model to More broadly, the capacity-skill framework provides a
provide serendipitous recommendations, or help them to useful starting point from which to evaluate the goodness
become less dependent on the APA. In the language of or badness of AI tools and systems, according to their con-
affordances, these options are action possibilities that exist duciveness or hostility to capacity cultivation. Given that AI
in the user’s field of affordances. However, only virtuous applications are not merely tools but socio-technical systems
superheroes are likely using APAs this way, while ordinary (Kudina and van de Poel 2024), fulfilling the moral obliga-
persons, inexperienced in the activity of life-planning (e.g., tion to ensure capacity-conducive environments in the age
people growing up with LLMs) might end up over-relying of AI requires paying attention not only to the technical or
on them for life-planning. From a structural point of view, design aspects of AI applications, but to the institutional,
if we want users to engage with serendipitous options and cultural, and governance contexts in which they are embed-
learn to become independent life planners, designers should ded. Insofar as socio-technical environments are value-
purposefully work to avoid LLMs potentially becoming laden, a Developmental Perfectionist approach provides a
replacements for life-planning, and so it is important that useful framework for critically reflecting on the values per-
these models are not marketed as omnipotent personal assis- taining to capacity cultivation embedded in AI applications
tants. Instead, they should be framed as exercises—tools to and systems. This is because we owe it to others to ensure
practice planning—from mundane tasks to life goals. Clear that as humans, we invest in the shared valuing of the human
boundaries should be established at the outset, with the user capacities, otherwise we risk losing the ‘human’ in us.
informed that the purpose is to cultivate their capacities.
Acknowledgements I am grateful to participants of the Jülich Speaker
Features like having time limits on interactions, a focus
Series in the Philosophy of Technology for helpful comments on an
on improving the user’s real-world embodied experience
earlier version of this paper, as well as to two anonymous reviewers
and the provision of feedback and practical tips that can for helpful comments.
be applied outside the virtual space, can further reinforce
Author contributions Avigail Ferdman has authored all the manuscript
this goal.
sections.
Importantly, prompting an LLM for serendipitous recom-
mendations may not necessarily guarantee serendipitous rec- Funding Open access funding provided by Technion - Israel Institute
ommendations. Whether LLMs can reliably follow prompts of Technology. The author did not receive funding from any organiza-
tion for the submitted work.
for serendipity depends on their training and fine-tuning.
Given that these models are currently optimized for over- Data availability No datasets were generated or analyzed during the
all user satisfaction (rather than serendipity), it is unclear current study.
whether over repeated use they will be able to overcome
Declarations
their training and actually prioritize serendipity over ‘vend-
ing-machine’/popular recommendations. More generally,
Competing Interests The authors declare no competing interests.
this provides reason to explicitly design and train recom-
mender systems to optimize for serendipity rather than user
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
satisfaction and the popularity of the suggested output.
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
6 Conclusions provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
According to the Developmental Perfectionism view, capac- otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in
ity impoverishment is robustly bad as it leads to impover- the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
ished lives. As such, protecting humans against capacity-
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a
deskilling is a moral obligation we have to others, to ensure
copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
capacity-conducive environments for all. Currently, the more
AI and automation uncritically replace human activity and
interaction, the greater the risk that social interactions will References
be primarily mediated by a disembodied, intersubjective
agent, undermining capacity cultivation. One of the impli- Altman S (2024) The Intelligence Age. https://i a.s amalt man.c om/.
cations is that to ensure proper cultivation of the capaci- Accessed 24 Apr 2025
ties, environments must encourage (not merely provide)
--- Page 12 ---
3 012 AI & SOCIETY (2026) 41:3001–3013
Arfini S, Bertolotti T, Magnani L (2020) The antinomies of serendipity realisability of agency thesis. Philos Technol 38:30. https:// doi.
how to cognitively frame serendipity for scientific discoveries. org/1 0.1 007/s 13347-0 25-0 0858-9
Topoi 39:939–948. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 007/s 11245-0 18-9 571-3 Fricker E (2021) Should we worry about silicone chip technology de-
Aylsworth T, Castro C (2024) Should i use ChatGPT to write skilling us? R Inst Philos Suppl 89:131–152. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.
my papers? Philos Technol 37:117. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 007/ 1017/S 13582 46121 00013 8
s13347-0 24-0 0809-w Gaut B (2010) The Philosophy of Creativity. Philosophy Compass
Bainbridge L (1983) Ironies of automation. Automatica 19:775–779. 5(12):1034–1046. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 111/j.1 747-9 991.2 010.
https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 016/0 005-1 098(83)9 0046-8 00351.x
Bonicalzi S, De Caro M, Giovanola B (2023) Artificial intelligence Gabriel I, Manzini A, Keeling G, et al (2024) The Ethics of Advanced
and autonomy: on the ethical dimension of recommender systems. AI Assistants. https://a rxiv.o rg/a bs/2 404.1 6244
Topoi 42:819–832. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 007/s 11245-0 23-0 9922-5 Gallagher S, Zahavi D (2013) The Phenomenological Mind, 2nd edn.
Bradford G (2015) Achievement. Oxford University Press, Oxford Routledge, London
Bradford G (2016) Perfectionism. In: Fletcher G (ed) The Routledge Gebru T, Torres ÉP (2023) Eugenics and the Promise of Utopia through
Handbook of Philosophy of Well-being. Routledge, London, pp AGI. IEEE SaTML 2023 - 1st Conference on Secure and Trust-
124–134 worthy Machine Learning
Bradford G (2021) Perfectionist bads. Philos Q 71:586–604. https:// Gerlich M (2025) Ai tools in society: impacts on cognitive offloading
doi.o rg/1 0.1 093/p q/p qaa05 5 and the future of critical thinking. Soc. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.3 390/
Bradford G (2025) Failure. In: Rossi M, Tappolet C (eds) Ill-Being: soc150 10006
Philosophical Perspectives. Oxford University Press, Oxford Gibson JJ (1979) The ecological approach to visual perception.
Bratman M (1983) Taking plans seriously. Soc Theory Pract 9:271–287 Houghton Mifflin, Boston
Budzyń K, Romańczyk M, Kitala D et al (2025) Endoscopist deskill- Grasso D (2025) Disembodied friendship: virtual friends and the ten-
ing risk after exposure to artificial intelligence in colonoscopy: a dencies of technologically mediated friendship. Ethics Inf Technol
multicentre, observational study. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol 27:13. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 007/s 10676-0 25-0 9822-9
10:896–903. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 016/S 2468-1 253(25)0 0133-5 Guay M (2025) AI Can’t Plan Your Whole Day—Not Yet—But We
Butler M (2024) Fracturing the affordance space: an account of digi- Found One App That Gets Close. Wirecutter. https://w ww.n ytim
talized alienation. Front Psychiatry. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.3 389/f psyt. es.c om/w irecu tter/r eview s/b est-a i-s chedu ling-a pps/. Accessed 2
2024.1 40758 6 May 2025
Boden M (2004) The Creative Mind: Myths and Mechanisms, 2nd edn. Hacker-Wright J (2009) Human nature, personhood, and ethical natu-
Routledge. London ralism. Philosophy 84:413–427
Campbell DR (2023) In defense of (some) online echo chambers. Ethics Halliday J (2025) Gen Z students in Manchester to learn ‘soft skills’
Inf Technol 25:45. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 007/s 10676-0 23-0 9715-9 such as empathy and time management. The Guardian. https://
Chen M (2022) Exploration in Recommender Systems. In: Proceedings www. thegua rdian. com/ societ y/2 025/a pr/2 1/g en-z- studen ts-i n-
of the Fifteenth ACM International Conference on Web Search manche ster-t o-l earn-s oft-s kills-s uch-a s-e mpath y-a nd-t ime-m anag
and Data Mining. Association for Computing Machinery, New ement. Accessed 25 April 2025
York, NY, USA, p 1642 Hendrick C (2025) Ultra-Processed Minds: The End of Deep Read-
Chiang T (2023) ChatGPT Is a Blurry JPEG of the Web. The New ing and What It Costs Us. In: The Learning Dispatch. https://
Yorker. https://w ww.n ewyor ker.c om/t ech/a nnals-o f-t echno logy/ carlhe ndric k.s ubsta ck.c om/p/u ltra-p roces sed-m inds-t he-e nd-o f.
chatgp t-i s-a-b lurry-j peg-o f-t he-w eb. Accessed 10 Feb 2023 Accessed 29 Apr 2025
Coeckelbergh M (2019) Skillful coping with and through tech- Heyd D, Miller FG (2010) Life plans: do they give meaning to our
nologies. AI & Soc 34:269–287. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 007/ lives? Monist 93:17–37
s00146-0 18-0 810-3 Hurka T (1993) Perfectionism. Oxford University Press, New York
Danzico L (2010) The design of serendipity is not by chance. Interact Hursthouse R (2022) Practical Wisdom: A Mundane Account. In:
17:16–18. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 145/1 83621 6.1 83622 0 Annas J, Reid J (eds) Virtue and Action: Selected Papers. Oxford
De Jaegher H, Di Paolo E (2007) Participatory sense-making. University Press, Oxford
Phenomenol Cogn Sci 6:485–507. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 007/ Kauppinen A (2025) Telic Perfectionism and the Badness of Pain. In:
s11097-0 07-9 076-9 Rossi M, Tappolet C (eds) Ill-Being: Philosophical Perspectives.
Di Paolo E, Thompson E (2014) The enactive approach. The Routledge Oxford University Press, Oxford
handbook of embodied cognition. Routledge/Taylor & Francis Kim Y, Oh S, Noh C et al (2025b) Design of a serendipity-incorporated
Group, New York, NY, USA, pp 68–78 recommender system. Electronics. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.3 390/e lect
Dokumacı A (2023) Activist Affordances: How Disabled People ronics 14040 821
Improvise More Habitable Worlds. Duke University Press Kim E, Choe K, Yoo M, et al (2025a) Beyond Tools: Understand-
Dreyfus HL, Dreyfus SE (1986) Mind over machine : the power of ing How Heavy Users Integrate LLMs into Everyday Tasks and
human intuition and expertise in the era of the computer. Free Decision-Making. http://a rxiv.o rg/a bs/2 502.1 5395
Press, New York Kotkov D (2024) Overview of Serendipity in Recommender Systems.
Ferdman A (2019) A Perfectionist Basic Structure. Philosophy & In: Stefanidis K, Systä K, Matera M et al (eds) Web Engineering.
Social Criticism 45:862–882. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 177/0 19145 3718 Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham, pp 453–457
820891 Kraut R (2007) What Is Good and Why: The Ethics of Well-Being.
Ferdman A (2024) Human Flourishing and Technology Affor- Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass
dances. Philosophy & Technology 37:1. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 007/ Kraut R (2013) Human diversity and the nature of well-being: reflec-
s13347-0 23-0 0686-9 tions on Sumner’s methodology. Res Philos 90:307–322. https://
Fletcher G (2016) Objective list theories. In: Fletcher G (ed) The doi.o rg/1 0.1 1612/r esphi l.2 013.9 0.3.1
Routledge Handbook of Philosophy of Well-Being. Routledge, Kremer M (2020) Gilbert Ryle on Skill as Knowledge-how. In: Frid-
London, pp 148–160 land E, Pavese C (eds) The Routledge Handbook of Philosophy
Floridi L (2025) AI as agency without intelligence: on artificial of Skill and Expertise. pp 100–112
intelligence as a new form of artificial agency and the multiple Krueger J (2023) Affordances and spatial agency in psychopathology.
Philos Psychol. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 080/0 95150 89.2 023.2 24397 5
--- Page 13 ---
AI & SOCIETY (2026) 41:3001–3013 3013
Kudina O, de Boer B (2024) Large language models, politics, and the Samuel A (2025) How to Build Your Own AI Assistant. Harvard Busi-
functionalization of language. AI Ethics. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 007/ ness Review. https://h br.o rg/2 025/0 3/h ow-t o-b uild-y our-o wn-a i-
s43681-0 24-0 0564-w assist ant. Accessed 23 April 2025
Kudina O, van de Poel I (2024) A sociotechnical system per- Schuster N, Lazar S (2024) Attention, moral skill, and algorith-
spective on AI. Minds Mach 34:21. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 007/ mic recommendation. Philos Stud. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 007/
s11023-0 24-0 9680-2 s11098-0 23-0 2083-6
Lee H-P (Hank), Sarkar A, Tankelevitch L, et al (2025) The Impact of Shepherd J (2021) The Shape of Agency: Control, Action,
Generative AI on Critical Thinking: Self-Reported Reductions in Skill,Knowledge. Oxford University Press
Cognitive Effort and Confidence Effects From a Survey of Knowl- Sherman N (1991) The Habituation of Character. In: The Fabric of
edgeWorkers. ACM, New York, NY, Yokohama, Japan Character: Aristotle’s Theory of Virtue. Oxford University Press
Liu Y, Moore A, Webb J, Vallor S (2022) Artificial moral advisors: Stanley J, Williamson T (2017) Skill. Noûs 51:713–726
A new perspective from moral psychology. In: Proceedings of Stichter M (2021) Differentiating the Skills of Practical Wisdom. In:
the 2022 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society. pp Vaccarezza MS, De Caro M (eds) Practical Wisdom: Philosophi-
436–445 cal and Psychological Perspectives. Routledge, pp 96–113
Ma Z, Mei Y, Su Z (2023) Understanding the benefits and challenges of Stichter M (2020) Virtue as Skill: Self-regulation and social psychol-
using large language model-based conversational agents for men- ogy. In: Fridland E, Pavese C (eds) The Routledge Handbook of
tal well-being support. AMIA Annu Symp Proc 2023:1105–1114 Philosophy of Skill and Expertise. pp 487–502
MacIntyre A (2017) Common Goods, Frequent Evils. The Common Sypnowich C (2016) Equality Renewed: Justice Flourishing and the
Good as Common Project, University of Notre Dame. https:// Egalitarian Ideal. Routledge Taylor & Francis Group, New York
www.y outub e.c om/w atch?v=9 nx0Kv b5U04. Tacca A, Gilbert F (2024) Just copy-paste me! Assessing the risks of
Manne K (2013) On Being Social in Metaethics. In: Shafer-Landau epistemic dependence on Large Language Models. In: Strasser A
R (ed) Oxford Studies in Metaethics, vol 8. Oxford University (ed) Anna’s AI Anthology. How to Live with Smart Machines?
Press, Oxford Xenomoi Verlag, Berlin, pp 31–52
Marin L (2024) Attending to the Online Other: A Phenomenology of Tollon F (2024) Technology and the situationist challenge to vir-
Attention on Social Media Platforms (1st edition). In: de Boer B, tue ethics. Sci Eng Ethics 30:10. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 007/
Zwier J (eds) Phenomenology and the Philosophy of Technology. s11948-0 24-0 0474-4
openbook publishers, pp 215–240 Vallor S (2015) Moral deskilling and upskilling in a new machine age:
Marin L, Steinert S (2025) Ctrl+ Ethics: Large Language Models and reflections on the ambiguous future of character. Philos Technol
Moral Deskilling in Professional Ethics Education. In: Philipp H 28:107–124. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 007/s 13347-0 14-0 156-9
(ed) Oxford Intersections: AI in Society. Oxford Academic Vallor S (2016) Technology and the Virtues. Oxford University Press,
Mitcham C (2024) Brief for political philosophy of engineer- New York
ing and technology. NanoEthics. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ Vigani D (2021) Virtue and embodied skill: refining the virtue-
s11569-0 24-0 0463-8 skill analogy. J Value Inq 55:251–268. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 007/
Natali C, Marconi L, Dias Duran LD, Cabitza F (2025) AI-induced s10790-0 21-0 9814-0
deskilling in medicine: a mixed-method review and research Withagen R, de Poel HJ, Araújo D, Pepping G-J (2012) Affordances
agenda for healthcare and beyond. Artif Intell Rev 58:356. https:// can invite behavior: reconsidering the relationship between affor-
doi.o rg/1 0.1 007/s 10462-0 25-1 1352-1 dances and agency. New Ideas Psychol 30:250–258. https://d oi.
NHS England (2023) The risk of deskilling | Workforce, training and org/1 0.1 016/j.n ewide apsyc h.2 011.1 2.0 03
education. In: NHS England | Workforce, training and education Wong P-H (2019) Rituals and machines: a Confucian response to tech-
| Digital Transformation. https://d igita l-t ransf ormat ion.h ee.n hs. nology-driven moral deskilling. Philosophies 4:59–0. https://d oi.
uk/b uildi ng-a-d igita l-w orkfo rce/d art-e d/h orizo n-s canni ng/d evel org/1 0.3 390/p hilos ophie s4040 059
oping-h ealth care-w orker s-c onfid ence-i n-a i/c hapte r-4-w orkfo rce- Zao-Sanders M (2025) How People Are Really Using Gen AI in 2025.
transf ormat ion/t he-r isk-o f-d eskil ling. Accessed 16 Sept 2025 Harvard Business Review. https://hbr.org/2025/04/how-people-
Nye BD, Silverman BG (2012) Affordance. In: Seel NM (ed) Ency- are-really-using-gen-ai-in-2025. Accessed 22 April 2025
clopedia of the sciences of learning. Springer, US, Boston, MA, Zelny A (2025) Offloading wisdom: four technological relations that
pp 179–183 mediate phronesis. Philos Technol 38:56. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 007/
Pavese C (2022) Knowledge How. In: Zalta EN, Nodelman U (eds) s13347-0 25-0 0889-2
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Fall 2022 Metaphysics Zhai C, Wibowo S, Li LD (2024) The effects of over-reliance on AI
Research Lab. Stanford University dialogue systems on students’ cognitive abilities: a systematic
Pavese C (2023) The shape of agency, by Joshua Shepherd. Mind review. Smart Learn Environ 11:28. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 186/
132:586–594. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 093/m ind/f zab09 0 s40561-0 24-0 0316-7
Pavese C (2024) Knowledge, skills, and creditability. Philos Stud. Zimmermann C, Poirier P, Catala A (2025) Performing arts and affor-
https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 007/s 11098-0 24-0 2261-0 dances: moving toward epistemic justice through embodied learn-
Reviglio U (2019) Serendipity as an emerging design principle of ing. Br J Aesthet. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 093/a esthj/a yaf00 4
the infosphere: challenges and opportunities. Ethics Inf Technol
21:151–166. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 007/s 10676-0 18-9 496-y Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
Rinta-Kahila T, Penttinen E, Salovaara A et al (2023) The vicious cir- jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
cles of skill erosion: a case study of cognitive automation. J Assoc
Inf Syst 24:1378–1412. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 7705/1 jais.0 0829
Rosen C (2024) The Extinction of Experience. W.W. Norton
Ryle G (2009) Knowing How and Knowing That. In: Collected Essays
1929 - 1968: Collected Papers Volume 2. Routledge, pp 222–235